# Creating a nodejs instance with Docker and communicating with postgres

In this tutorial we will use node to read, write, edit & delete from a postgres database. I'll be making a node container with the latest release of node alpine.

In following guides we will be creating a solid development enviornment in node, unit testing, security and deployment to production. For now, we will get a simple crud app working.

## First steps

Make sure that you have a VM set up to develop in and that docker-ce and docker-compose are installed and that you have a postgres container set up and ready to work with.

Please reference these 3 guides to get everything ready.

1.  [Setting up a local development server with Virtual box and Debian and SSH access](01-local-development-server-with-virtualbox.md)
2.  [Installing Docker on a production server or local development VM](00.2-Installing-Docker.md)
3.  [Creating and using a postgres database in a Docker container](08.1-creating-and-using-a-postgres-docker-container.md)

## Creating the node container

As with the previous postgres guide I'll be using `docker-compose` to spin up my node instance.

Depending on how you want to structure things, you can put all of this into the same `docker-compose.yml` file, or if you want to use the postgres container for other applications put it into it's own file. Check out the guide [thoughts on conainers and some other tricks](02.1-thoughts-on-containers-and-some-tricks.md) if you don't know which way to do it yet.

### Adding node to the `docker-compose` file

To begin with I'm just going to tie our node instance directly to our postgres database and put it in the same compose file.

```yaml
version: "3.7"
services:    
    ... postgres compose stuff is here ... 
    node:
        container_name: node
        image: node:14-alpine
        network_mode: host
        depends_on:
            - postgres
        volumes:
            - ./api:/api
        ports:
            - "4000:4000"
        restart: unless-stopped
```

You can place this above or below the postgres and adminer services, it doesn't really matter. We will have a working directory called `api` that will hold our node code load.

Once you've edited the compose file, shut down the other services if they are still running and then bring them all up.

```bash
docker-compose up
```

if that doesn't do the trick and pull the node image, because you've already run the postgres and adminer container use the `force-recreate` flag like so:

```bash
docker-compose up --force-recreate
```

If all went well you should be greated with some output that looks like this:

```bash
postgres    | 2020-06-03 03:59:03.000 UTC [1] LOG:  database system is ready to accept connections
node exited with code 0
```

### Troubleshooting

In the compose file we've stated we want to run the application on port 4000. If you have a firewall set up on your dev box go ahead and open that now. 

## Setting up the node package file

In the compose file we've stated that we want to work out of a directory called `api` (because we are creating an API. It's still a poor name none the less). 

We will need to create a `package.json` for node in there. 

Navigate into that directory and run npm init then create the server.js file

```bash
# Move into the api directory
cd api/

# Automatically creatte the package.json file
node init -y

# Create a server.js file as an app entry point
touch server.js
```

**note:** _The `-y` flag will skip all the questions and just create the damn file. You can go back and edit at anytime later. And we'll actually be doing that before we move the app to production. Either way it doesn't matter right now._

### Installing express and nodemon (to K.I.S.S.)

To keep this on track and not install 10,001 modules as node developers like to do, we'll just install the essential `nodemon` to refresh the server each time the development code is updated and `express` which we will be using express as the framework for the API modules as an example. 

nodemon will be a development dependency and express will be a production dependency. It's important to distinguish these.

#### Adding the npm start command to the package file

Now we want to edit the start script in the package file
