# Creating and using a postgres database created with docker

In this guide we are going to explore working with a postgresql container. 

## First steps

Make sure that you have a VM set up to develop in and that docker-ce and docker-compose are installed.

Please reference these two guides to get everything ready.

1.  [Setting up a local development server with Virtual box and Debian and SSH access](01-local-development-server-with-virtualbox.md)
2.  [Installing Docker on a production server or local testing VM](12-Installing-Docker.md)

## Creating the project structure

We first need a top level directory to hold our project. I'll create it in a `~/Projects` folder in my main user folder, You can call it anything you like, I'll name mine `pern-api`.

_as you may have guess PERN stands for Postges, Express, React & Node_... and well we are making an API from it...

```bash
take pern-api

touch docker-compose.yml
```

Now we will need a couple folders within our project folder to work out of. The first will store the contents of the database. In the project folder I'll create a new folder called `db`

```bash
mkdir db
```

### Setting up the database

The first docker container we will create will be the postgres install. 

-   postgres is at: `postgres:13-alpine`
    and then one other folder for later to hold all of our node data.

```bash
mkdir api
```

All of our backend project files will go into the `api` folder. 

### Fleshing out the `docker-compose.yml` file

```yaml
version: "3.8"
services:
    postgres:
        container_name: postgres
        image: postgres:13-alpine
        network_mode: host
        environment:
            POSTGRES_USER: postgres
            POSTGRES_PASSWORD: postgres
            POSTGRES_DATABSE: testdb
        volumes:
            - ./db:/var/lib/postgresql/data
        ports:
            - "5432:5432"
        restart: unless-stopped
```

The first thing we do is tell docker-compose what version of syntax we will be using. Right now the most current one is `3.7`.

Then we will create a section for `services`. And then add `postgres` as the first service.

1.  `container_name`  - what we want the container to be identified as.
2.  `image` - what image we will be creating the container from.
3.  Some `enviornment`al variables to hold our database login.
4.  `volumes` - Directories that the container will share with us back to the host. Here i'm going to create a folder called `db` and have database persistence be stored in there. 

_Please note that we don't even need to create the `db` directory itself... It will be created for us the first time that we run `docker-compose`._

> In volumes the first value is the local path on your machine.
>
> The second value (after the colon) is the path within the container to the data you would like.

5.  `ports` - we tell the container what ports to serve the service from. in this case it's only on `5432`.
6.  `restart` - How we want to handle it if our application or container crashes. If something goes wrong, I would like the container to restart, Unless it was intentionally stopped.

### Connecting the manual way

To connect to the postgres container and run some commands the basic gist is:

1.  #### connect to the postgress container
    ```bash
    docker exec -it postgres psql -U postgres
    ```
    which translates to:
    > `docker exec -it [container_name] psql -U [username]`
    >
    > -   `docker exec -it`  is the command to connect to the container
    > -   `pgsql` is the database admin tool located within the postgres container.
    > -   `-U` is the flag to connect to `pgsql` with a defined username. (remember in the `docker-compose` file we gave our user the name of `postgres`, which is honestly kind of some confusing bullshit since it's the same as the container name. Sorry about that.)
2.  #### Create a database called `test1`
    ```sql
    CREATE DATABASE test1;
    ```
3.  #### Connect to the new database (`test1`)

    ```bash
    /c test1
    ```

    `/c` - is the command to connect, followed by the name of the database that you want to connect to.

    You should see the prompt change again to `test1=#`

4.  #### Make a table in `test1`

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE somebullshit (column1 VARCHAR(255));
    ```

    > Here we have create a table called `somebullshit` and created a column called column1 and given it a data type of `VARCHAR(255)`

5.  #### Take a look at the table that you just created.

    To view tables in a database that you are logged in and connected to, the command is:

    ```bash
    \dt;
    ```

    This should give you the output:

    ```sql
    List of relations
    Schema |     Name     | Type  |  Owner
    --------+--------------+-------+----------
    public | somebullshit | table | postgres

    (1 row)
    ```

6.  #### Insert some bullshit data into the `somebullshit` table we just created.

    ```sql
    INSERT INTO somebullshit (column1) values ('some bullshit data');
    ```

    > Insert into `column1` of the `somebullshit` table the value of `some bullshit data`

7.  #### Fetch the bullshit data you just inserted with a `SELECT` statement

    ```sql
    SELECT * FROM somebullshit;
    ```

    > select everything that's in the `somebullshit` table.

    and we should get the output:

    ```sql
    column1
    --------------------
    some bullshit data
    (1 row)
    ```

8.  #### Exit the container shell & and bringing the container down

    The last step here will be to exit the container shell and then bring the container down

    To exit the shell, simply type:

    ```bash
    exit
    ```

    Now to bring the container down

    ```bash
    docker-compose down
    ```

And lastly here are some other nifty backslash commands for psql.

-   `\c [database name] or \connect [database name]` - Connect to a database
-   `\l` or `\list` - List all databases
-   `\dt` - List all tables in a database
-   `\a` - align or unalign table format output
-   `\h` - help

So there's the quick and not so easy way of working with the postgres container. Let's next look at a slightly better way of connecting and managing databases.

## Creating a container for `adminer`

Adminer is a database management tool similar to phpMyAdmin that will help us administer our postgres install without having to enter into the containers shell.

### Add adminer to the existing `docker-compose.yml` file

```yaml
adminer:
    container_name: adminer
    image: adminer:4.7.7
    network_mode: host
    ports:
        - "8080:8080"
    depends_on:
        - postgres
    restart: unless-stopped
postgres:
        ...leave everything in the postgres section in place...
```

**Make sure to leave all the postgres stuff intact below your adminer service !**

Here we have added adminer as a docker service. Now spin up both postgres db and adminer with the command:

```bash
docker-compose up
```

#### If you have problems connecting to Adminer

-   check that your firewall has the correct port open
-   check that you have entered the db name correctly
-   check that you have entered the user and pass that you added to the postgres config is the same.
-   check the docker logs that come up with the spin up and make sure it's not crashing for some random reason.

### Cleaning things up

Now that we've spun up a database and connected to it and added some bullshit rows and columns and values. Let's clean it up and get it squared away for a real project. 

1.  Go back to localhost
2.  Select the `test1` database
3.  drop it

All that bullshit is gone. And you can connect to adminer to create and destroy new databases, tables, rows, columns and all database things without having to screw too much with the containers shell.

Let's proceed to getting node set up and creating, reading, updating and deleting postgres data.
